Example for integration between pycuda and cudf (#16)
rapidsai/rapids-examples: pycuda_cudf_integration/README.md

# Using PyCuda and Cudf
## Overview
Sometimes, a user may wish to run custom device code to do numerical operations on a `cuDF` column. 

One way to do this is through custom cython bindings which can require significant setup work as shown [here](https://github.com/rapidsai/rapids-examples/tree/main/shareable-dataframes).

With `PyCUDA`,  the custom CUDA kernels can be run directly using its` sourcModule` to modify the `cuDF`  dataframe.   

`PyCUDA` has limitations, especially around running host-side code, which can are noted in detail in the limitations section.  

> 

Reviewer: Could use a brief section enumerating when to use PyCUDA and when to use an alternative (such as Cython/pybind11/etc.).

## PyCUDA Interactions

> In order to write custom cuda kernel in `pycuda` we make use of `SourceModule` provided to us by the library. After constructing the kernel, we can retreive the function and store it in a variable like below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to write custom cuda kernel in `pycuda` we make use of `SourceModule`. After constructing the kernel, we can retrieve the function and store it in a variable like below.
```

```python
import pycuda.autoprimaryctx
from pycuda.compiler import SourceModule

mod = SourceModule("""
    __global__ void doublify(int64_t *a, int N)
    {
      int stride = blockDim.x * gridDim.x;
      for (int i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x; i < N; i += stride) {
        if (i < N) {
          a[i] *= 2;
        }
      }
    }
    """)
func = mod.get_function("doublify")
```

> The interactions between `cudf` and `pycuda` is dependent upon the implementation of `cudf` columns as `cupy` arrays, which has the `__cuda_array_interface__` property implemented. Allowing us to pass on information regarding the column directly to `pycuda`, by passing it as a parameter like below.

Reviewer: This is generally true, but worth clarifying a bit. Both cuDF columns and CuPy arrays are separate data structures that implement the cuda array interface. This interface serves as a contract which tells the world how to convert the underlying data between array-like data structures without requiring a copy. So it's not that cuDF columns are arrays, but that they expose the necessary information to be converted into arrays seamlessly.

```python
import cudf
import cupy as cp

df = cudf.DataFrame({'col': [i for i in range(200000)]})

> length = cp.int32(len(df['col']))

Reviewer: This is unused

func(df['col'], size, block=(256,1,1), grid=(4096,))
```

## PyCuda Limitations

> At its core, `pycuda` is meant for writing CUDA kernels that operate on fixed length columns. This limits its usage (at least for now) to numeric columns only. Furthermore, one interesting fact about `pycuda` is that it allows including external libraries, such as `thrust` or `libcudf`. However, the issue becomes that the majority of these external libraries are meant to run on host code, which is not possible via `SourceModule`.

Reviewer: Rather than speculate on the future of pycuda, let's stick with the status

Reviewer: "Furthermore, one interesting fact about `pycuda` is that it allows including external libraries, such as `thrust` or `libcudf`. However, the issue becomes that the majority of these external libraries are meant to run on host code, which is not possible via `SourceModule`."

I think we can clarify this to be something like "pycuda allows device-based code in external libraries such as thrust, but does not support running host code".

```
We can construct the sample kernel like below,
```python
mod = SourceModule('''
#include <thrust/random.h>

extern "C" {

    __global__ void random_column(double* a, int N)
    {
      thrust::default_random_engine rng;
      
      int stride = blockDim.x * gridDim.x;
      for (int i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x; i < N; i += stride) {
        if (i < N) {
          rng.discard(i);
          thrust::uniform_real_distribution<float> rand01(0,1);
          double r = rand01(rng);
          a[i] = r;
        }
      }
    }
}
''', no_extern_c=True)

func = mod.get_function('random_column')
func(df['col'], length, block=(256,1,1), grid=(4096,))
```
Here we use `thrust` to generate random numbers to fill in the cudf. In some cases, the CUDA library you want to use may be stored in other locations (such as when you install `libcudf` in a conda environment), in that case, we must include the directories in `SourceModule` like below.
```python
cuda_includes = ['/raid/sding/miniconda3/envs/cudf_dev/include', '/raid/sding/miniconda3/envs/cudf_dev/include/libcudf/libcudacxx']

mod = SourceModule('''
#include <cudf/column/column_device_view.cuh>

extern "C" {

>     __global__ void random_column(double* a, int N)

Reviewer: If we're going to include this example, it should do something. If we can't use libcudf APIs but can operate on columns, we can still show that.

# Using PyCuda and Cudf
## Overview
Sometimes, a user may wish to run custom device code to do numerical operations on a `cuDF` column. 

One way to do this is through custom cython bindings which can require significant setup work as shown [here](https://github.com/rapidsai/rapids-examples/tree/main/shareable-dataframes).

With `PyCUDA`,  the custom CUDA kernels can be run directly using its` sourcModule` to modify the `cuDF`  dataframe.   

> `PyCUDA` has limitations, especially around running host-side code, which can are noted in detail in the limitations section.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`PyCUDA` has limitations, especially around running host-side code, which are noted in detail in the limitations section.  
```

> ## PyCUDA Interactions

Reviewer 2: We should add a "How to install pycuda section" before this.

> In order to write custom cuda kernel in `pycuda` we make use of `SourceModule`. After constructing the kernel, we can retrieve the function and store it in a variable like below.

Reviewer 2: Will be good to define what `Source Module` is and add a link it to the relevant documentation.

```python
import pycuda.autoprimaryctx
from pycuda.compiler import SourceModule

mod = SourceModule("""
    __global__ void doublify(int64_t *a, int N)
    {
      int stride = blockDim.x * gridDim.x;
      for (int i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x; i < N; i += stride) {
        if (i < N) {
          a[i] *= 2;
        }
      }
    }
    """)
func = mod.get_function("doublify")
```

> The interactions between `cudf` and `pycuda` is dependent upon the implementation of the `__cuda_array_interface__`, which serves as a contract to tell the world of how to convert the underlying data between array-like data structures, without requiring a copy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interactions between `cudf` and `pycuda` depends upon the implementation of the `__cuda_array_interface__`, which serves as a contract defining how to convert the underlying data between array-like data structures, without requiring a copy.
```

```python
import cudf
import cupy as cp

df = cudf.DataFrame({'col': [i for i in range(200000)]})
length = cp.int32(len(df['col']))

func(df['col'], length, block=(256,1,1), grid=(4096,))
```

## PyCuda Limitations

> At its core, `pycuda` is meant for writing CUDA kernels that operate on fixed length columns. One interesting fact about `pycuda` is that it allows including external libraries, such as `thrust` or `libcudf`. However, the issue becomes that pycuda allows device-based code in external libraries such as `thrust`, but does not support running host code.

Reviewer: `operate on fixed length columns` is this meant to be fixed width typed data? Is there a circumstance in which circumstance a data buffer would have variable length?

        if (i < N) {
          rng.discard(i);
          thrust::uniform_real_distribution<float> rand01(0,1);
          double r = rand01(rng);
          a[i] = r;
        }
      }
    }
}
''', no_extern_c=True)

func = mod.get_function('random_column')
func(df['col'], length, block=(256,1,1), grid=(4096,))
```
Here we use `thrust` to generate random numbers to fill in the cudf. Below is another interesting column operation that reverses the contents of a column.
```python
import pycuda.autoprimaryctx
from pycuda.compiler import SourceModule
import cudf
import cupy as cp

df = cudf.DataFrame({'col': [i for i in range(100)]})
length = cp.int32(len(df['col'])) - 1

mod = SourceModule('''
__global__ void reverse_row(long* reverse_row, int N)
{      
  int stride = blockDim.x * gridDim.x;
  for (int i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x; i < N; i += stride) {
    if (i < N - i) {
        int row1 = reverse_row[i];
        int row2 = reverse_row[N - i];
        reverse_row[i] = row2;
        reverse_row[N - i] = row1;
    }
  }
}
''')

func = mod.get_function('reverse_row')
func(df['col'], length, block=(256,1,1), grid=(4096,))
```

## When to use what?

> After reading the above, a question that may come to mind is when should you use `Pycuda`, `Cython` or any other alternatives that allow interfacing between `Python` and low-level `C` code? `Pycuda` is likely best used when the developer is looking for an easy and low overhead way of interfacing with a `CUDA` kernel for the purpose of accelerating an operation on their fixed length column data, as `Pycuda` allows the developer to access the power of GPU with little overhead. On the other hand, if the developer is okay with a large amount of `Cython` overhead and requires the ability to execute host-level code, than building `Cython` bindings will likely be the more appropriate option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After reading the above, a question that may come to mind is when should you use `Pycuda`, `Cython` or any other alternatives that allow interfacing between `Python` and low-level `C` code? `Pycuda` is likely a good fit when the developer is looking for an easy and low overhead way of interfacing with a `CUDA` kernel for the purpose of accelerating an operation on their fixed length column data. `Pycuda` allows the developer to access the power of GPU with little overhead. On the other hand, if the developer is okay with a large amount of `Cython` overhead and requires the ability to execute host-level code, than building `Cython` bindings will likely be the more appropriate option.
```

Generally good to avoid terms like "best" when there are tradeoffs. Also, fixed width vs fixed length column (same question as above).

# Using PyCuda and Cudf
## Overview

> Sometimes, a user may wish to conduct custom numeric operations on a `cudf` column. However, to do this through custom cython bindings may require significant work and overhead, as shown [here](https://github.com/rapidsai/rapids-examples/tree/main/shareable-dataframes). A quick, but more limiting alternative would be to make use of `PyCuda`, allowing us to write simple CUDA kernels that are able to modify our `cudf` dataframe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes, a user may wish to run custom device code to do numerical operations on a `cuDF` column. 

One way to do this is through custom cython bindings which can require significant setup work as shown [here](https://github.com/rapidsai/rapids-examples/tree/main/shareable-dataframes).

With `PyCUDA`,  the custom CUDA kernels can be run directly using its` sourcModule` to modify the `cuDF`  dataframe.   

`PyCUDA` has limitations, especially around running host-side code, which can are noted in detail in the limitations section.  
```

> ## PyCuda interactions

Reviewer 2: We should add installation instructions for `pyCUDA` here.

> ## PyCuda interactions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## PyCUDA Interactions
```

In order to write custom cuda kernel in `pycuda` we make use of `SourceModule` provided to us by the library. After constructing the kernel, we can retreive the function and store it in a variable like below.
```python
import pycuda.autoprimaryctx
from pycuda.compiler import SourceModule
mod = SourceModule("""
    __global__ void doublify(int64_t *a, int N)
    {
      int stride = blockDim.x * gridDim.x;
      for (int i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x; i < N; i += stride) {
        if (i < N) {
          a[i] *= 2;
        }
      }
    }
    """)
func = mod.get_function("doublify")
```
The interactions between `cudf` and `pycuda` is dependent upon the implementation of `cudf` columns as `cupy` arrays, which has the `__cuda_array_interface__` property implemented. Allowing us to pass on information regarding the column directly to `pycuda`, by passing it as a parameter like below.
```python
import cudf
import cupy as cp

df = cudf.DataFrame({'col': [i for i in range(200000)]})
length = cp.int32(len(df['col']))

func(df['col'], size, block=(256,1,1), grid=(4096,))
```

> ## PyCuda Limitations

Reviewer 2: Add example of using `pyCUDA`  + `device side` code of the external library like using random numbers with details on how to compile it. 

An example of compiling `libcudf` will be good too even if it does not involve actually running anything so that we know how to set it up for the future.
